### 21. "The unparalleled" &mdash; or the gift of solitude
This brief excursion to the "opposite neighbors", the physicists, may serve as a landmark for a reader who (like most people) are ignorant about everything in the world of mathematicians, but who have surely heard talk about Einstein and his famous "fourth dimension", and even, of quantum mechanics. After all, even if it wasn't planned by the inventors that their discoveries would materialize in Hiroshima, and later in nuclear escalations as much military as (so-called) "peaceful", the fact is that a discovery in physics has a tangible and quasi-immediate impact on the world of people in general. The impact of a mathematical discovery, and what's more in the mathematics called "pure" (that is to say, without motivation in view of "applications") is less direct, and surely more delicate to figure out. I have not been aware, for example, that my contributions to mathematics have "served" to anything, to construct any machine let's say. I have no merit whatsoever, this is for sure, but that does not stop me to reassure me of it.<sup>[misinterpreted?]</sup> As soon as there are applications, one can be sure that it is the military (and after them, the police) who are the first to take hold of them &mdash; and as for the industry (even the one called "peaceful"), it is not always much better...

For my own information, or that of a mathematical reader, the idea imposes itself to rather try to situate my work by "landmarks" in the history of mathematics itself, rather than to go searching for analogies elsewhere. I have thought about it for the last few days, within the limits of my quite vague knowledge of the history in question <sup>77</sup>(&ast;). In the course of the "Promenade" already, I have had the occasion to evoke a "lineage" of mathematicians, of a temperament in which I can recognize myself: Galois, Riemann, Hilbert. If I were better at the course of history of my art, there is a chance that I would have found to extend this line further into the past, or to intersperse maybe some other names that I hardly know other than by hearsay. The thing that has hit me, is that I don't recall having had the acquaintance, if only through allusion by my friends or colleagues better versed in history than me, with a mathematician apart from me who has brought a multiplicity of new ideas, not more or less disjoint one from the other, but as part of a vast unifying vision (as it were in the case of Newton and Einstein in physics and cosmology, and of Darwin and Pasteur in biology). I have had the acquaintance of only two "moments" in the history of mathematics, where a new wide-ranging vision was born. The first of these moments is that of the birth of mathematics, as much a science as what we understand by the term today, 2500 years ago, in the ancient Greece. The other is, above all, that of the birth of the infinitesimal and integral calculus, in the 17th century, an age marked by the names of Newton, Leibniz, Descartes and others. For as much as I know, the vision whenever it was born was the work of not a single person, but the collective work of an era.

Of course, between the epoch of Pythagoras and Euclid and the beginning of the 17th century, mathematics had the time to change its face, and the same between that of the "Calculus of the infinitely small" created by the mathematicians of the 17th century, and the middle of the present 19th. But as far as I know, the profound changes that intervened during these two periods, one more than two thousand years long and the other over three centuries, never materialized or condensed into a new vision expressed in a given work<sup>78</sup>(&ast;), in a way similar to that which took place in physics and in cosmology, with the grand syntheses of Newton, then Einstein, in two crucial moments of their history.

It really seems like as much as a servant of a vast unifying vision was born in me, I am "one of a kind" in the history of mathematics from the beginnings to the present day. Sorry for having the air of wanting to distinguish myself more than what seems allowed! To my own relief, I believe however to discern a sort of potential _brother_ (and providential!). I have already sometimes had the occasion to evoke him, as the first in a line of "brothers in temperament": _Evariste Galois_. In his short and dazzling life<sup>79</sup>(&ast;), I believe to discern the primer of a grand vision &mdash; of precisely a "wedding of number and magnitude", in a new geometric vision. I recall elsewhere in Récoltes et Semailles<sup>80</sup>(&ast;&ast;) how, two years ago, this sudden intuition appeared to me: that in the mathematical work that at this moment exercised on me the most powerful fascination, I was on my way to "resume the legacy of Galois". This intuition, rarely evoked since, has however had its time to ripen in silence. The retrospective reflection on my work that I pursue since three weeks will surely also have contributed. The very direct filiation that I believe to recognize at the present with a mathematician of the past, is that which connects me to Evariste Galois. Right or wrong, to me it seems like this vision that I have developed for fifteen years of my life, and that has continued still to ripen in me and to be enriched during the sixteen years elapsed since my departure from the mathematical scene &mdash; that this vision is also that which Galois couldn't have avoided to develop <sup>81</sup>(&ast;&ast;&ast;), if he had been around in my place, and if an early death had not come to brutally cut short this magnificent spirit.

There is still another reason, doubtlessly, that contributes to give me this sentiment of an "essential kinship" &mdash; of a kinship which does not reduce to a single "mathematical temperament", nor to prominent aspects of a work. Between his life and mine, I sense also a kinship of destiny. Surely, Galois died stupidly, at the age of 21 years, while I am approaching my sixties, and well determined to make old bones. That does not prevent however that Evariste Galois [...]

[...]

One may also call this the _gift of solitude_.


<sup>77</sup>(&ast;) Ever since I was a kid, I was never very hooked on history (nor on geometry for that matter). (In the fifth part of Récoltes et Semailles (only partially written)<sup>[[doesn't seem to exist](https://webusers.imj-prg.fr/~leila.schneps/grothendieckcircle/Spirituality/Spirituality23.pdf)]</sup>, I have the occasion "by passing" to detect what seems to me the profound reason behind this partial "block" toward history &mdash; a block which is on its way to resorb, I believe, in recent years.) The mathematical education received by my elders, in the "Bourbakian circle", has besides not acted to settle things &mdash; the occasional historical references there were more than rare.

<sup>78</sup>(&ast;) The hours after writing these lines, I was struck that I did not contemplate here the vast synthesis of contemporary mathematicians that strives to present the (collective) treatise of N. Bourbaki. (There will be more abundantly a question about the Bourbaki group in the first part of Récoltes et Semailles.) This is due, it seems to me, to two reasons:

Firstly, this synthesis is confined to a sort of "putting things in order" of a vast set of ideas and results already known, without bringing any new ideas with it. If there is a new idea, this would be that of a mathematically precise definition of the notion of "structure", which has proven to be a valuable guiding thread throughout the treatise. But this idea seems to me to rather resemble that of an intelligent and imaginative dictionary writer, than an element of renewal of a language, giving a renewed apprehension of reality (here, of the mathematical one).

Secondly, from the fifties onward, the idea of structure is seen to be overtaken by the events, with the sudden afflux of "categorical" methods in various of the most dynamical parts of mathematics, such as topology or algebraic geometry. (Thus, the notion of "topos" refused to enter into the "Bourbakian bag" of structures, decidedly narrow at the armholes!) [...], Bourbaki renounced its initial ambition, which was to provide _the_ foundations and _the_ basic language for the set of contemporary mathematics.

It has, on the other hand, fixed a language and, at the same time, a certain _style_ of writing and of approaching mathematics. The style originally reflected (very partially) a certain _spirit_, living and a direct heritage from Hilbert. Over the fifties and sixties, the style stopped imposing itself &mdash for better or (mostly) worse. Since about twenty years, it stopped becomming a rigid _"canon"_ of a "rigor" of pure facade, and the spirit that once animated it seems to have faded away without return.

<sup>79</sup>(&ast;) Evariste Galois (1811-1832) died in a duel, at the age of twenty-one. There are, I think, many biographies of him. I read as a young man a romanticized biography, written by the physicist Infeld, that made a big impression on me at the time.

<sup>80</sup>(&ast;&ast;) See "The legacy of Galois" ([ReS I, section 7](../part-1/7.md)).

<sup>81</sup>(&ast;&ast;&ast;)

<sup>82</sup>(&ast;)
