### 1. The letter of 1000 pages
<div style="text-align: right"><i>May 1985</i></div>

The letter that I am sending you here, typed and printed in a limited number of copies by the cares of my university, is however neither an offprint, nor a preprint. Its name, Récoltes et Semailles, announces this clearly enough. I send it to you as I would send a long letter &mdash; a letter [?] &mdash; If I send it to you, instead of contenting myself that you take knowledge of it one day (if you have the curiosity for it) in some volume on sale in a bookstore (if there is an editor crazy enough to set forth on this venture...), it is because I am addressing it more to you than to others. More than once while writing I have thought about you &mdash; it must be said that it took me more than a year to write it, this letter, by putting myself wholly into it. It is a gift that I send you, and I have taken great care when writing to give that which I have (at each moment) best to offer. I don't know if the gift will be welcomed &mdash; your response (or your non-response...) will let me know...


At the same time as to you, I am sending Récoltes et Semailles to all those of my colleagues, friends or (ex-)students in the mathematical world, to whom I have been closely related at some moment, or who figure in my reflection in one way or another, by name or not. There is a chance that you appear there, and if you read with your heart and not only with your eyes and head, surely you will recognize yourself even there where you are not named. I equally send Récoltes et Semailles to some other friends even, scientific or not.

This "letter of introduction" that you are on your way to read, which is announced and presented to you by a "letter of 1000 pages" (to begin with...), will serve also as a foreword. Yet the latter is not written at the moment of writing these lines. Récoltes et Semailles consists additionally of five parts (not counting an introduction "in several parts" [fr: à tiroirs]). I send you here [parts I (Fatuité et Renouvellement)](../table-of-contents.md#part-1), [II (L'Enterrement (1) &mdash; ou la Robe de l'Empereur de Chine)](../table-of-contents.md#part-2), and [IV (L'Enterrement (3) &mdash; ou les Quatre Opérations)](../table-of-contents.md#part-4)<sup>83</sup>(&ast;). It is these, it seems to me, that concern you in particular. [Part III (L'Enterrement (2) &mdash; ou la Clef du Yin et du Yang)](../table-of-contents.md#part-3) is without doubt the most personal part of my testimony, and that at the same time which, still more than the others, appears to me to have a "universal" value, beyond particular circumstances surrounding its birth. I refer to this part here and there in part IV (Les Quatre Opérations), which may however be read independently, and even (to a great extent) independently of the three parts that preceed it<sup>84</sup>(&ast;). If the reading of that which I am sending you here impels you to respond (which is my wish), and if it gives you a desire to read also the missing part, let me know. I will be my pleasure to send it to you, as long as your response makes me feel that your interest exceeds that of a wholly superficial curiosity.

<sup>83</sup>(&ast;) I put aside the colleagues who figure in my reflection in a title or another, but who I don't know personally. I limit myself to send them "Les Quatre Opérations" (which concerns them more particularly), at the same time as the "fascicle 0" consisting of this letter, and the Introduction à Récoltes et Semailles (plus the detailed table of contents of the first four parts).

<sup>84</sup>(&ast;) In general, you may note that each "section" (in Fatuité et Renouvellement) or each "note" (in any which one of three parts following in Récoltes et Semailles) has its own unity and autonomy. It may be read independently of the rest, just like one may find interest and pleasure in looking at a hand, a foot, a finger or a toe or any other portion big or small of the entire body, on the condition of not forgetting that it is there the part of a Whole, and that only this Whole (which remains among the unspoken) which gives it all its meaning.
