### 11. [...]

I think I have finished making the tour of the most important things that I envisioned to tell you on the subject of Harvests and Sowings, to make you already aware "of what it's about", surely, I've said more than enough to permit you to judge whether _yourself_, you consider that this letter of (more than) a thousand pages which follow "concerns you", or not &mdash; and as a consequence, whether you will or won't continue your reading. If "yes", it seems useful to make contact again with some explanations (of practical nature, notably) on the subject of the _form_ of Harvests and Sowings.

This form is the reflection and expression of a certain _spirit_, that I have tried to "get through" in the preceding pages. Compared to my previous publications, if there is a novel quality which appears in Harvests and Sowings, and equally in "Pursuing Stacks" from which it emerged, it is no doubt the _spontaneity_. Of course, there are common threads, and great interrogations, that give their coherence and unity to the whole of the reflection. This is however pursued from day to day, without pre-established "program" or "plan", without there ever being question of me fixing in advance "what is to be shown". My purpose is not to demonstrate, but rather to _discover_, to penetrate further into an unknown substance, to condense that which has not yet been sensed, suspected, glimpsed. I may say, without any exaggeration really, that in this work, there is not a single day nor a single night of reflection which unfolds in the realm of the "expected", in terms of ideas, images, associations that would be present at the moment when I sat down before a blank sheet of paper, to obstinately pursue a tenacious "thread", or to resume another that just cropped up. At each time, that which appeared in the reflection is _other_ than that which I thought to be seeing before me. Most frequently, the reflection is undertaken in routes that were entirely unplanned at the outset, leading to new landscapes, all the more unplanned. But even though it would be held to a more or less planned itinerary, that which the journey reveals to me as the hours go by differs as much from the image that I had of it when setting of, as a real landscape, with its plays on cool shadows and warm light, its delicate perspective changing as the trekker moves around it, and the innumerable sounds and nameless scents carried by a breeze which makes the grass dance and the forests sing... &mdash; that such a living, unseizable landscape, different from a post card, as pretty and successful, as "just" as it may be.

It is the reflection pursued in one go, in the course of a day or a night, which constitutes the undivided unity, the living cell, somehow individual, in the whole of the reflection (Harvests and Sowings, in this case). This is at each of these units (or these "notes"<sup>122</sup>(&ast;), forming a melody...) this that the body of a living organism [...]

Sometimes, however, in a single reflection pursued in one go, one collects the important caesuras after the event, that [...]

---

<sup>122</sup>(&ast;)

<sup>123</sup>(&ast;)

<sup>124</sup>(&ast;)

<sup>125</sup>(&ast;)

<sup>126</sup>(&ast;&ast;)
