### 12. Spontaneity and rigor

Spontaneity and rigor are the "dark" and "bright" slopes of a single undivided quality. It is from their wedding, only, that was born this particular quality of a text, or of a being, that one may try to evoke by an expression like "quality of truth". If in my past publications, spontaneity has been (if not absent, then at least) on rations, [...], I don't think, then the rigor has diminished even so. Rather, the full-fledged presence of its companion yin gives to rigor a new dimension, a new fertility.

This rigor is exercised against itself<sup>[misinterpreted?]</sup>, seeing to it that [...]

And this same rigor, this same vigilant attention directs me as much toward spontaneity as toward that which takes its aspects, to do the part, here again, of these "slopes" everything that is natural, certainly, and distinguish them from those that truly spring from the deep layers of the being, of the original drive of knowledge and of action, carrying us to meet a lot of people.

At the level of writing, the rigor manifests itself as a constant effort to discern as finely, as faithfully as possible, aided by the language, thoughts, sentiments, perceptions, images, intuitions... that it is about expressing, without contenting oneself with a vague or approximate term where the thing to be expressed is clearly decided at the boundaries, nor with a term of fictitious precision (and thereby, just as distorting) for expressing a thing which remains enshrouded in a mist of that which has not yet been approached. When we try to capture it as it is in the moment, and only then, does the unknown reveal its true nature to us, and not until the full light of day maybe, if it is done for the day and as our desire prompts it to get rid of its veils of mist and darkness. Our role is not to pretend to describe and fixate that which we don't know and which escapes us, but to become humbly and passionately familiar with the unknown and the mystery that surrounds us on all sides.

It is said that the role of writing is not to document the results of a piece of research, but the very process of the research &mdash; works of love and works of our love affairs with Our Mother the World, the Unknown, which without respite calls us to meet Her again and her inexhaustible Body, everywhere to Her where we carry mysterious ways of desire.

To describe this process, the steps backwards, which moderate, foresee, deepen and sometimes correct the "first draft" of writing, even a second or a third, are part of the same initiative of discovery. They form an essential part of the text and gives it all of its meaning. This is why the "notes" (or "annotations") at the end of Fatuité et Renouvellement, to which it is referred here and there in the course of fifty "sections" that constitute the "first draft" of the text, are an inseparable and essential part of this one. I strongly recommend you to consult it along the way, at least at the end of each section where there appears one or more references to such "notes". The same is true for the footnotes in the other parts of Harvests and Sowings, or for the cross-references, in such a "note" (constituting here the "principal text"), to subsequent such notes, which therefore make the function of returning to this one, or for annotation. It's there, with my advice not to separate yourself from the table of contents, the main reading recommendations that I'm seeing to make for you.

One last practical question, which will close (a little prosaically) this letter which it is time to terminate. There has been a little "panic" at times, to prepare the different fascicles of Harvests and Sowings for the circulation by the Duplication service at the University, in time so that the circulation happens (if possible) during the summer holidays. In the haste, there appeared a whole sheet of footnotes in the last minute, to add on to fascicle 2 ([L'Enterrement (1) &mdash; ou la robe de l'Empereur de Chine](../table-of-contents.md#part-2)), which has "jumped". It involved escpecially the rectification of certain material errors, that appeared only last, in the course of writing [Les Quatre Opérations](../table-of-contents.md#part-4). There is one of these footnotes that is of greater consequence than the others, and that I would like to point out here. It's about an annotation to the note ["La Victime &mdash; ou les deux silences"](../table-of-contents.md#la-victime). This note, where I sought to, among other things, identify my impressions (all subjective, of course) on the subject of the way in which my friend Zoghman Mebkhout "internalized" in this period the iniquitous spoliation which he made the expenses, has been experienced by him as unjust towards him, while I had the air of almost getting "in the same bag" with his despoilers. What is for sure, is that in this note, that does not pretend to give something else than the impressions related to a particular "moment", I only present one side of the story [fr: seul son de cloche, lit: single sound of the bell], by leaving unsaid (and as something self-evident, no doubt) certain other sounds just as real (and less debatable perhaps). Consistently does the reflection on this delicate subject grow considerably deeper, one year after Zoghman's parting. Other elements of reflection on the same subject are also to be found in the two notes ["Trois jalons — ou l'innocence"](../table-of-contents.md#trois-jalons) and ["Les pages mortes"](../table-of-contents.md#pages-mortes). These three notes are part of "L'Apothéose", which is the part of the Quatre Opérations devoted to the operation of appropriation and of misappropriation of the work of Zoghman Mebkhout.

It only remains for me to wish you a good reading &mdash; and looking forward to reading you for my part!

<div style="text-align: right"><i>Alexandre Grothendieck</i></div>
