### 7. Respect and fortitude
But I am digressing again, in anticipation of what the reflection has taught me. I have benefited from a double aim, clearly present in me since even before the beginning of this: the aim of a "declaration of intentions", and (intimately linked to this, as it will appear) that of expressing myself on the subject of the nature of creative work. There was however also a third aim, surely less clearly present at a conscious level, but answering to a more profound and more essential need. It was generated by the sometimes disconcerting "interpellations", reaching from in my life as a mathematician through the voice of those who had been my students or my friends (or at least, a good number of them). At an epidermal level, this need was reflected by a desire to "get it off my chest" [fr: vider mon sac], to say some "uncomfortable truths". But more deeply, surely, there was the need to finally _get acquainted_ [fr: faire connaissance] with a certain past, that I had previously chosen to avoid. It is from this need, above all, that Harvests and Sowings originates. This long reflection was my "response", day by day, to this drive toward understanding in me, and to the constantly renewed interpellation that came to me from the external world, from the "mathematical world" that I had quit without meaning to return. Except for the very first pages of "Fatuité et Renouvellement", those which form the first two chapters ("Travail et découverte" and "[The dream and the Dreamer](../table-of-contents.md#part-1-2)"), and from the chapter "[Birth of a concern](../table-of-contents.md#part-1-3)" which follows, with a "testimony" which was by no means part of the plan, it is this need to make acquaintance with my past and to take it on in full, which (I think) was the principal force at work in the writing of Harvests and Sowings.

The interpellation which came to me from the world of mathematicians, and which returned to me with a new force throughout Harvests and Sowings (and especially, during the "investigation" [fr: enquête] pursued in parts [II](../table-of-contents.md#part-2), and [IV](../table-of-contents.md#part-4)), immediately took the mask of complacency [fr: suffisance], when not that of disdain ("delicately proportioned"), of derision or contempt, whether it be toward me (sometimes) or (especially) toward those who dared to be inspired by me (unaware, undoubtedly, of what was waiting for them) and who were "classified" as having links to me, by some tacit and implacable decree. And again I see here the "evident" and "profound" connection appearing, between _respect_ (or the absence of respect) for another person; for the act of creation and for some of its most delicate and essential fruits; and finally the respect for the most obvious rules of scientific ethics: those which are rooted in an elementary respect for oneself and others and which I would be tempted to call the _"rules of decency"_ in the exercise of our art. There are many aspects, surely, of an elementary and essential _"respect for oneself"_. If I tried, in a single succinct formula, to take stock of what Harvests and Sowings has taught me on the subject of a certain world which was mine, a world with which I identified for more than twenty years of my life, I would say: it is a world which has _lost respect_<sup>99</sup>(&ast;).

<!-- bookmark -->

This was already strongly felt, if not formulated, already years before. It was only confirmed and made more precise, in a manner always unexpected and sometimes stupefying, throughout Harvests and Sowings. It was clearly apparent already from the moment when a reflection of "philosophical" and general nature suddenly became a personal testimony (in the section "The welcome foreigner" ([n&deg; 9](../table-of-contents.md#part-1-3)) opening the chapter "Birth of a concern" already cited).

This perception didn't however appear in the tone of a sour or bitter recrimination, but (by the internal logic of the writing and by the different attitude that it evokes) in that of an _interrogation_: what was my own part in this degradation, in this loss of respect that I see today? That is the principal interrogation which spans and carries this first part of Harvests and Sowings, until the moment it finally resolves into a clear and unequivocal conclusion<sup>100</sup>(&ast;&ast;). Before then, this degradation had appeared to me as suddenly "fallen from the sky", in an inexplicable and moreover more outrageous, intolerable way. In the course of the reflection, I discovered that it had continued insidiously, surely without anyone detecting it [...], throughout fifty and sixty years, _including in myself_.

The recognition of this humble fact, surely and without any appearance quite obvious, marks a first crucial turn in the testimony, and an immediate qualitative change<sup>101</sup>(&ast;&ast;&ast;). This was a first essential thing that I had to learn, about my past as a mathematician and about myself. This awareness of a _share of responsibility_ which fell on me in the general degradation (awareness more or less acute following the moments of reflection) rested like a base note and as a reminder, throughout Harvests and Sowings. It was thus, especially, at times when my reflection assumed the proportions of an investigations on the disgraces and on the inequities of an epoch. Together with the desire to understand, thus with the curiosity which animates and carries forward all true work of discovery, it is this humble awareness (repeatedly forgotten along the way and resurfacing after all, where one least expects it...) which has preserved my testimony [...]

This absence of complacency toward myself has likewise given me this inner calm, or this strength, which has saved me from the traps of complacency toward others, or even just toward those of a false "discretion". All the things I thought I had to say, at one moment or another of the reflection, whether it be about me, or about those of my colleagues, ex-students or friends, or about a milieu, or about an epoch, I have said, without ever having to banish my misgivings. For those, it has sufficed for me each time to examine them attentively, so that they fade without leaving any traces.

---

<sup>99</sup>(&ast;) Here again, there is a formulation which applies itself not only to a certain limited social milieu, where I have had ample occasion to see the thing up close, but seems to me to summarize a certain degradation all over the modern world. (Compare with footnote [<sup>95</sup>(&ast;)](./6.md#footnote-95).) In the very limited setting of the record of an "investigation" pursued in Harvests and Sowings, this formulation appears in the note of last April 2, "Le respect" ([n&deg; 179](../table-of-contents.md#le-respect)).

<sup>100</sup>(&ast;&ast;) In the sections "La mathématique sportive" and "Fini le manège" ([n&deg; 40, 41](../table-of-contents.md#sportive)).

<sup>101</sup>(&ast;&ast;&ast;) The next day, the testimony deepened in a meditation about myself, and guard<sup>[?]</sup> this particular quality in the weeks that followed, until the end of the "first breath" of Harvests and Sowings (with the section "Le poids d'un passé", [n&deg; 50](../table-of-contents.md#poids-passe)).
