### 9. The shedding
Like I have already insinuated at times, I have had to overcome considerable interior resistances, or rather make them subside by patient, meticulous and tenacious work, in order to achieve a separation of myself from certain familiar images, solidly founded, of a considerable inertia, which for decades was taken from me (as with everyone, and surely also with you) the place of a direct and nuanced perception of reality &mdash; in this case, of that of a certain mathematical world, to which I remain connected by a past and by a work. One of the strongest anchored of these images, or proconceived ideas, is that it seems to be excluded from the outset that a scolar of international reputation, or even a man who is proving to be a great mathematician, can afford (in part because [...]) frauds big or small; or if he abstains (again out of old habit) from soaking his hand by himself, that he can nevertheless welcome with open arms such operations ([...]) conducted by another, and where, for some reason or another, there is something there for him.

This inertia of mind was such for me, that there were at least two months alone, at the end of a long reflection which had already been pursued for a whole year, that I ended up timidly glimpsing that Serre was maybe also up to something, in this Burial &mdash; something which now appears to me like a piece of evidence, even independently of the eloquent conversation that I had with him recently. Like for all the members of the "Bourbaki environment" who welcomed me with benevolence when I first started, and especially in his case, he had for me a sort of tacit "taboo" around him. He represented the very embodiment of a certain "elegance" &mdash; of an elegance which was by no means limited to its form, but which also included a rigor, a scrupulous probity.

Before I discovered the Burial, on April 19 of last year, the idea would not have come to me, even in a dream, that one of those who had been my students were capable of a dishonesty in the exercise of their profession, be it toward me or anyone else; and it is for the most brilliant of them, the one who had also been the closest to me, that such a supposition to me would have seemed completely aberrant. Yet, already from the moment of my departure and over the years that followed and even until today, I have had ample opportunity to realize just how its relation to me was divided. More than once, too, I saw it use (for the sole pleasure, one could say) power to discourage and humiliate, when the situation was right. I was profoundly affected by it each time (more, no doubt, than I would be willing to admit...). They were eloquent enough signs of a profound disruption, which (I've had equally ample opportunity to note) was by no means limited only to himself, even in the most limited circle of those who were my students. Such a disruption, by the loss of respect for other people, is not less flagrant or less profound, than that which manifests itself by that which one calls a "professional dishonesty". Nonetheless the discovery of such a dishonesty came to me as a total surprise and as a shock.

In the weeks that followed this breathtaking revelation, followed by a whole "cascade" of others of the same kind, I realized moreover little-by-little that a certain scheming, among some of my students<sup>116</sup>(&ast;), had commenced already in the years that preceded my departure. This was particularly flagrant, precisely, with the most brilliant one of them &mdash; the one who, after my departure, had set the tone and (like I have written at places) "took the discrete and effective lead in the operations". With the decline of nearly twenty years, this scheming appears to me as being self-evident, it "stared you in the face" [fr: crevait les yeux]. If I chose to close my eyes then to what was going on, all in the pursuit of a "white whale" [fr: baleine blanche] in a world "where all is order and beauty" (as I would like to imagine), I will state today that I did not know then to assume the responsibility which rested on me, toward students learning my contact with a job that I love; a job which is something else than a simple know-how, or the development of a certain "intuition" [fr: flair], by a complacency toward brilliant students, that I liked (by unspoken decree) to treat them "as being separate" and above suspicion, I contributed then my part<sup>117</sup>(&ast;&ast;) to the hatching of the corruption (without precedent, it seems to me) that I am watching as it spreads today in a world and among beings which have been dear to me.

Certainly, seeing their immense inertia, it took work intense and sustained to separate me from that which we usually call "illusions" (not without some intonation of regret...), and that I would rather call preconceived ideas; about myself, about an environment with which I had once identified, about people that I loved and that maybe I still love &mdash; to "separate" myself from those ideas, or rather, to _let them detach from me_. This was a labour, that's for sure, but never a struggle &mdash; a labour which brought me, among many other valuable things, moments of sadness at times, but never a moment of regret nor of bitterness. Bitterness is one of the means of evading an understanding, of evading the message of an experience; of maintaining oneself in a certain tenacious illusion about oneself, at the price of another "illusion" (in negative, in a sense) about the world and others.

It is without bitterness and without regret that I see them detach from me one by one, like so many cumbersome if not crushing weights, these preconceived ideas  which were "dear" to me, by old habit and because they were "since forever". They had become, for sure, like second nature. But this "second nature" is not "me". To separate myself piece by piece was not a heartbreak nor a frustration, [...]. The "shedding" whereof I speak comes as a reward and the fruit of a _labour_. Its sign is an immediate and beneficial relief, a welcome _liberation_.

<sup>116</sup>(&ast;)

<sup>117</sup>(&ast;&ast;)
