### (1) The last duties

(February 16) Today it is exactly one month since I began the unexpected reflection, triggered by reading the autobiography of C. G. Jung. I thought it would take a few days, to cast my first strong impressions onto paper &mdash; and today I haven't even finished the outline of these impressions! They enriched and transformed in the course of reading, by virtue of the work triggered by it and by the writing of my reading notes. I have barely had the time to go over the impressions provoked by the first four chapters on the early life of Jung &mdash; chapters written by Jung's own hand. I was preparing to confront these impressions and others, but always according to the first view, generated by subsequent chapters. But when I was about to get started today, I realized that this digression (already approaching a hundred pages...) it isn't really the right place for this other "digression", already long enough on its own, that I have called "The key of yin and yang". (A digression of that I believed, for a month, was approaching its end<sup>823</sup>(&ast;),) It is true that my reading notes on Jung fit nicely with the dialectics of yin and yang, and that they also conducted me, without having looked for it, to clarify things that have been barely touched upon previously, on my life, as well as life in general. This doesn't seem sufficient to me however for opening a parenthesis of dimensions as prohibitive inside another parenthesis, itself being in the final chapter, "The Funeral ceremony", of a long reflection on my burial. It's about time to resume this reflection and to carry it out to its proper end!



----

<sup>823</sup>(&ast;)







---

---

---

---

---

---

---

---

---

---

---

---
