_June 1983_

### The child and the Good Lord

The mathematical notes I'm working on at present are the first in thirteen years that I've intended for publication. The reader won't be surprised that after a long silence, my style of expression has changed. This change of expression is not however the sign of a change in style or in the method of work (<sup>1</sup>), and even less that of a transformation in the very nature of my mathematical work. Not only has it remained the same &mdash; but I have acquired the conviction that the nature of the work of discovery is the same as that of a person who discovers another, that it is beyond the differences which create conditionings and temperaments of infinite variation.

Discovery is the privilege of the child. I am talking about a small child, the child who still lacks the fear of being wrong, of looking like a fool, of not being serious, of not acting like everyone else. He lacks the fear moreover that the things he is considering will have the bad taste of being different from what he expected, from what they should be, or rather: from what they obviously _are_. He ignores the silent and flawless consensus which is part of the air that we breathe &mdash; that of all the sensible and well known people per se. God knows [...]

Our minds are saturated with diverse "knowledge", an entanglement of fears and laziness, with cravings and prohibitions, with information to all comers and with pushbutton explanations &mdash; an enclosed space into which information, cravings and fears are crammed without ever engulfing the wind from the sea. Except for a routine know-how, it seems like the principal role of this "knowledge" is to remove a living perception, an apprehension of the things in this world. Its effect is above all that of an immense inertia, of an overwhelming burden.

The small child discovers the world as he breathes &mdash; the flux and reflux of his respiration welcomes the world and its delicate being, and he projects himself into the world which he welcomes. The adult also discovers, in those rare moments when he has forgotten his fears and his knowledge, when he sees things or himself with eyes wide open, eager to get to know, fresh eyes &mfesh; the eyes of a child.

<center>*&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;*</center>
<center>*</center>

God created the world progressively as he discovered it, or rather he _creates_ the world eternally, progressively as he discovers it &mdash; and he discovers it progressively as he creates it. He created the world and creates it day after day, by resuming it millions and millions of times, without rest; by groping, making millions and millions of mistakes and correcting the trajectory, without getting tired... Each time, in this game of probing things, of the response of things ("this one is bad", or: "you are kidding me", or "it's running like clockwork, keep it up"), and of the new survey probe correcting or resuming the previous one, in response to the previous response..., at each round trip in this infinite dialogue between the Creator and the Things, which takes place at all times and in all places of the Creation, God learns, discovers, he becomes acquainted with things more and more intimately, as they progressively come to life, take form and transform between His hands. This is the process of discovery and of creation, and seems to always have been (insofar as we can know). It has been like this, [...]

It happens that someone of us discovers something or another. Perhaps he rediscovers in his own life, with amazement, what there is to _discover_. Everyone has in hismself all that it takes to discover all that attracts him in this vast world, including this marvelous capacity in him &mdash; the simplest, most evident thing in the world! (A thing which many have however forgotten, just like we have forgotten to sing, or to breathe the way a child breathes...)

Everyone can rediscover what there is to discover and create, and noone can invent it. It has been there before us, and it is what it is.
