### The "Mathematical community": fiction and reality
No wonder then that, since that year maybe in my heart of hearts, and more and more clearly in any case in the course of the years that followed, I felt like I was part of this world, which I had the pleasure to refer to by the name, loaded to me with meaning, of the _"mathematical community"_. Before writing these lines, the occasion had never presented itself to examine what meaning I gave to this word, even though I identified to a large extent with this "community". It is now clear that it represents for me no more or less than a sort of ideal continuation, in space and in time, of the benevolent world that received me, and that accepted me as one of their own; a world, moreover, to which I was linked by one of the great passions that have dominated my life.

This "community", to which I identified more and more, was not an entirely fictive extrapolation of the mathematical milieu which initially received me. The initial milieu grew little by little, I would say: the circle of mathematicians who I was brought to associate with regularly, driven by themes of common interest and by personal affinities, broadened in the ten or twenty years that followed this initial contact. In concrete terms, this is the circle of colleagues and friends, or rather this concentric structure ranging from colleagues to whom I was the closest (initially Dieudonné, Schwarz, Godement, later especially Serre, still later people like Andreotti, Lang, Tate, Zariski, Hironaka, Mumford, Bott, Mike Artin, not to mention the people of the Bourbaki group which itself grew little by little, and students who came to me at the end of the sixties...), to other colleagues that I had the occasion to meet here and there and to whom I was linked in a more or less narrow fashion by affinities more or less strong &mdash; it is thus this microcosm, constituted by chance meetings and affinities, which represented the concrete content of this name charged for me with warmth and resonance: the mathematical community. When I identified to it like to a living entity, warm-hearted, it was in fact to this microcosm that I identified.

It was only after the "big turning point" of 1970, the first _awakening_ should I say, that I realized that this cosy and sympathetic microcosm only represented a very small portion of the "mathematical world", and that the traits that I liked to ascribe to this world, that I continued to overlook, in which I had never thought to take an interest, were fictive traits.

In the course of twenty-two years, this same microcosm moreover changed its face, in a surrounding world that also changed its. Mine also, certainly, over the years and no doubt, I have changed, like the world around me. I don't know if my friends and colleagues perceived more strongly than me this change, in the surrounding world, in their own microcosm, and in themselves. I couldn't say no longer when and how this strange change took place &mdash; it came no doubt insidiously, stealthily: _the man of reputation was feared_. I myself was feared &mdash; if not by my students or by my friends, or by those who knew me personally, then at least by those who only knew me by reputation, and who didn't feel protected by a comparable reputation.

I only noticed the fear which raged in the mathematical world (and just as much, if not more, in other scientific environments) in the aftermath of my "awakening" almost fifteen years ago<sup>[?]</sup>. During the fifteen years that preceded it, progressively and without seeing it coming, I entered into the role of "big boss", in the world of Who is Who in mathematics. Also without expecting it, I was a prisoner of this role, which isolated me from all but my "peers" and a handful of students ([...]) who [...]. Only once was I released from this role, and at least part of the fear which surrounded me fell. The tongues were loosened, that had been mute to me for years.

The testimony that they brought me was not only that of the fear. It was also that of _contempt_. Contempt especially for people in a place opposite to others, a contempt which raises and feeds the fear.

I had very little experience of this fear, but of the contempt, in times when a person and the life of a person didn't weigh heavily. I had liked to forget the time of this contempt, and now it was brought back to my memory! Maybe it never ceased, while I was content with simply changing the world (it seemed to me), to look the other way, or simply: to pretend to see nothing, hear nothing, apart from passionate and interminable mathematical discussions? During those days, I finally accepted to learn that the contempt was raging everywhere around me, in this world that I had chosen as mine, to which I identified, which had had my [caution?] and which had pampered me.
