### Meeting with Claude Chevalley, or: freedom and good intents
Perhaps the preceding lines may give the impression that I was upset by the testimonies that, almost overnight, began to flow toward me. This is not the case however. These testimonies were registered at a level that remained superficial. They were simply added next to other facts that I had just learned, or that I knew while avoiding to pay attention to so far. Today, I would express the lesson that I learned like so: "the scientists", from the most illustrious to the most obscure, are people exactly like everyone else! I reveled to imagine that "we" were somehow better, that we had something more &mdash; it had well taken me a year or two to rid myself of this illusion, tenacious for sure!

Among my friends who helped me, only one was part of the milieu that I had just left without meaning to return <sup>(6)</sup>. This was Claude Chevalley. While he didn't make a speech and wasn't interested in mine, I think I can say that I learned from him more important and hidden things than the one that I have just said. At the times when I saw him very often (the time of the group "Survivre", which he joined with a reserved conviction), he often [déroutait] me. I couldn't how,  but I felt like he held a knowledge that escaped me, a comprehension of certain essential and surely simple things, which surely can be expressed in simple words, but nevertheless without the understanding "getting across" from one to another. I now realize that there was a difference in maturity between him and me, which often made me feel like I was in an awkward position toward him, in a sort of dialogue of the deaf which wasn't due to a lack of sympathy or esteem. Without having expressed himself in these terms (as far as I can remember), it had to be clear to him that the "questionings" (on the "social role of the scientist", of science, etc...) that I arrived at, either alone, or by the logic of a reflection and a joint activity within the "Survivre" group (which later became "Survivre et Vivre" [en: Survive and Live]) &mdash; that these questionings rested on superficial grounds. They concerned the world in which I lived, for sure, and even the role which I played in it &mdash; but they didn't really implicate me in a deeper way. My vision of myself, during these bustling years, didn't change a bit. This is not when I began to get to know myself. It was only six years later that for the first time in my life I got rid of a tenacious illusion, not only about others or about the surrounding world, but about myself. This was another awakening, of a greater scope than the first which prepared for it. It was one of the first in a whole "cascade" of successive awakenings, that, I hope, will continue even in my remaining years.

I don't recall Chevalley ever having made an allusion to the knowledge of self, or the "discovery of self", better said. In retrospect, it is clear however that he has to have began to get to know himself a long time ago. He would sometimes of himself, just a few words on this or that occasion, with a disconcerting simplicity. He is one of two or three people that I haven't heard [sortir de cliché?]. He spoke little, and what he said expressed, not ideas that he would have adopted and made his own, but a personal perception and comprehension of things. This is surely why he often disconcerted me, already at times when we still met within the Bourbaki group. What he said often jostled the ways of seeing things that were dear to me, and that for this reason I considered as "right". There was in him an interior autonomy which I lacked, and which I began to perceive obscurely at the time of "Survivre et Vivre". This autonomy wasn't in the range of the intellect, of discourse. It wasn't a thing that one could "adopt", like ideas, points of view, etc... The idea never came to me, fortunately, to want to "take as mine" this autonomy perceived in another person. It was necessary for me to find my own autonomy. This also means: for me to learn (or relearn) to be myself. But in those years, I had no doubts in the least about my lack of maturity, of inner autonomy. If I ended up with this discovery, surely the encounter with Chevalley was among the ferments which were silently at work in me, while I was embarking on grand projects. It was neither discourse nor words that sowed this ferment. To sow it, it sufficed to meet such a person by chance on my route to [...]

It seems to me like in those early years of the seventies, when we were meeting regularly at the occasion of the publication of the bulletin "Survivre et Vivre", Chevalley was trying, without insistence, to communicate to me a message that I was then too clumsy to grasp, or too locked up in my activist tasks. I realized obscurely that he had something to teach me on liberty &mdash; on inner liberty. While I had the tendency to to function with grand moral principles and had began to sound this trumpet since the first numbers of Survivre, like something self-evident, he had a particular aversion for moralizing discourse. I think this was the thing about him that [déroutait] me the most, at the beginnings of Survivre. To him, such discourse was just an attempted constraint, overlapping with a multitude of other exterior constraints that can suffocate a person. One may surely spend the rest of one's life discussing such a way of seeing things, the pros and the cons. It totally jostled mine, animated (one can suspect) by more noble and generous sentiments. I struggled, it was incomprehensible to me that Chevalley, whom I held in the highest esteem and with whom I find myself somewhat like a comrade in arms, taking a [malin plaisir] not to share these sentiments! I didn't understand that the truth, the reality of things, is not a question neither of good sentiments, nor of points of view or of preferences. Chevalley _saw_ a thing, all simple and real, and I didn't see it. It isn't that he had read it somewhere; [...]. One may read a text at the rigour [...] I don't think that Chevalley had better eyes than me. But he used them, and I didn't. I was too taken by my good intentions and the rest all the rest of it to have the leisure to regard the effect of my good intentions and principles on myself and others, starting with my children.

He must have seen that often I wasn't using my eyes, that I didn't even have the least desire to. It is strange that he never hinted at this to me. Or did he, without me hearing? Or did it abstain, judging that it was a lost cause? Or maybe the idea didn't even come to his mind &mdash; it is my business after all and not his, if I use my eyes or not!

--------

<sup>(6)</sup> [...]
