### Merit and contempt
I would like to examine more closely, to the light of my own limited experience, when and how the contempt was installed in the world of mathematicians, and more perticularly in the "microcosm" of colleagues, friends and students who became my second homeland. And at the same time, to see what was my part in this transformation.

I seem to be able to say, without reservations, that I didn't meet in 1948-1949, in the circle of mathematicians of whom I spoke earlier (whose center was initially the Bourbaki group for me), the slightest trace of contempt, or simply of disdain, of condescendence, toward myself or to any other young person, French or alien, having come to learn the trade of mathematics. The people who played a leading role, by their position or their prestige, such as Leray, Cartan, Weil, weren't feared by me, nor I think by any of my classmates. Apart from Leray and Cartan, who made very "distinguished gentlemen", it took me even a good moment vefore realizing that everyone of these fellows who disembarked [...], were professor of the University just like Cartan himself, by no means like me [...], and was in addition to be a mathematician of international scale and audience.

Following a suggestion by Weil, I spent the three years that followed in Nancy, which at that moment was a little headquarter of Bourbaki, with Delsarte, Dieudonné, Schwarz, Godement (and a little later also Serre) teaching at the university. It was only there with me that a handful of four or five young people (among whom I recall Lions, Malgrange, Bruhat, Berger, without confusion), thus we were there significantly less "buried in the heap" than in Paris. The atmosphere was all the more familiar, everyone knew each other personally, and we all addressed each other informally I think. When I dig through my memory, it was however there that it happened for the first and only time that I saw before me a mathematician treating a student with overt contempt. The unfortunate came for the day, from a different town, to work with his boss. (He had to prepare a doctoral thesis, which he had moreover passed honorably, and he had since acquired a certain notoreity, I think.) I was really shocked by the scene. If anyone allowed themselves such a tone toward me for just a second, I would have slammed the door on his face at once! In this case, I knew the "boss" well, I was even on first name terms with him [fr: à tu et à toi], not with the student whom I only knew by sight. My elder had, in addition to an extensive culture (not only mathematical) and an incisive mind, a sort of peremptory authority which at that moment (and still for really long after, until the beginnings of the 70s) impressed me. He exercised a certain commanding influence on me. I don't recall if I asked him a question on the subject of his attitude, only the conclusion that I got from the scene: that this unfortunate student must be nobody, to merit being treated in this way &mdash; something like that. Whilst I did not say if the student was in fact nobody, it was a reason for him to advise him to do something else, and to cease to work with him, but under no circumstances to treat him with contempt. I identified as "strong at maths" like this prestigious elder, at the expense of "nobodies" whom he would be permitted to contemn. I followed then the path paved in complacency with comtempt, which suited me, bringing the relieving fact that _me_, I was accepted in the brotherhood of meritorious people, strong at math! (<sup>7</sup>)

Of course, no more than anyone else, I never would have put it so clearly: the people who are trying to do maths without getting there are worthy of contempt! I would have heard someone say something in this direction, about this time or some other, I would have [...]. The fact is that I was bathing in this ambiguity, I played on two tables that didn't communicate: on the one hand the beautiful principles and intentions, and on the other: poor guy, must really be nobody in order to be treated like that (understood: it is not to me that this genre of misadventure could come, that's for sure!).

To me it finally seemed like that incident which I have reported on, and especially the role (apparently anodyne) that I played in it, is in fact typical of an ambiguity in me, which followed me throughout my whole life as a mathematician in the twenty years that followed, and which only dissipated in the aftermath of the "awakening" of 1970 (<sup>8</sup>), without me detecting it clearly even before today, in writing these lines. It is too bad moreover that I didn't get an overview at that moment. Maybe the time wasn't ripe for me. [...]

The thing which springs clearly from this, is my complicity with attitudes of contempt. They date back at least to the early fifties, so since the years that followed the benevolent welcome received from Cartan and his friends. If I "couldn't see anything" later, while the contempt became commonplace just about everywhere, it is because I didn't wish to see &mdash; not only in that isolated and particularly flagrant event, [...]

This complacency was in close symbiosis with my new identity, that of a respected member of a group, the group of meritorious people, strong at math! I remember that I was particularly satisfied, even proud, that in this world that I had chosen, that had coopted me, it wasn't even the social position nor even (and not!) the mere reputation which counted, but further that one had to be merited &mdash; you even had to be the professor of a University or an academician or [...], if you were just a mediocre mathematician (poor guy!) you had nothing, only merits mattered, deep and original ideas, technical virtuosity, vast visions and all that!

This ideology of merits, to which I identified without reservation (of course while it remained implicit, unexpressed), nonetheless took [...], as I'm saying, the well-known awakening of 1970. I am not sure moreover that it diappeared without trace after that moment. It would no doubt have taken [...] Better late than never!

--------

(<sup>7</sup>) [...]
