### Error and discovery

Returning to the style of my mathematical work itself, or to its "nature" or to its "approach", there are now like before those that the good God himself has taught without words to anyone, God knows when, maybe a long time before our birth. _I do as he does._ It is also what anyone does out of instinct, as soon as curiosity pushes him to get to know that thing amongst all, a thing from then on invested with this desire, this thirst...

When I am curious of a thing, mathematical or otherwise, I _interrogate_ it. I interrogate it, without worrying about whether my question is perhaps silly or whether it [...]. Often the question takes the form of an affirmation &mdash; an affirmation which, in truth, is a probe. I believe more or less, in my affirmation, depending of course on the point where I'm at in my comprehension of the things that I'm about to consider. Often, especially at the beginning of an investigation, the affirmation is downright false &mdash; still it had to be done in order to be able to convince oneself. Often, it suffices to write it down to make it obvious that it is false, while before writing it down it was a vague blur, like a discomfort, instead of this evidence. This now permits returning to the issue without the ignorance, with a question-affirmation perhaps or slightly less "off the mark". More often still, the affirmation taken at face value proves false, but the intuition which, still awkwardly, sought expression in it is right, while remaining fuzzy. This intuition decants little by little [...] no less informed initially by false or inadequate ideas, [...]

But it also seems like in this process,  the recurring survey probes converge toward a certain image of the situation, taking out the mists [...] conviction that this image expresses reality well &mdash; while it doesn't, when this image is tainted by a serious error, distorting it deeply. The work, sometimes laborious, which leads to the detection of such a false idea, from the first "take-offs" identified between the image obtained and some obvious facts, or between this image and others which are also trusted &mdash; this work is often marked by a growing tension, as one gradually approaches the knot of the contradiction, which [...] _The discovery of the error is a crucial moment, a moment of creation [...]_

_Fear of the error and fear of the truth is one and the same thing._ He who fears beingwrong is incapable of discovery. It is when we fear being wrong that the error within us is as unchangeable as a rock. For in our fear, we cling to what we have declared "true" one day, or to what has always been presented as such. When we are [...]
