### The unmentionable toils

It is surely not a coincidence that the spontaneous approach of any real research never appears so to speak in texts or discourses that are supposed to communicate and transmit the substance of what was "found". Texts and discourses are most often confined to recording the _"results"_, in a form which to ordinary  mortals must make them appear as austere and immutable laws, inscribed for all eternity in granite tables of the sort of a gigantic library, and dictated by some omniscient God to initiated and learned scribes; to those who write scholarly books and articles no less scholarly, those who transmit a knowledge from the pulpit, or in the very restricted circle of a seminar. Is there a single textbook, a single user manual for school children, high schoolers, students, even "us researchers", which is able to give the unfortunate reader the slightest idea of what research is &mdash if it isn't just the universal idea received that research, is when one is very knowledgeable, when one has passed all these tests and even competitions, big heads like, Pasteur and Curie and the Nobel price and all that... Our other readers or listeners, swallowing as best they can the Knowledge that these great men kindly recorded for the good of humanity, one is barely good (if one works hard) to pass our examinations at the end of the year, and yet...

How many are there, included among the unfortunate "researchers" themselves, in need of theses or of articles, and even included among the more "scholarly", the most prestigeous among us &mdash; who therefore have the simplicity of seeing "research", as no more or less than the _interrogation_ of things, passionately &mdash; like a child who _wants to know_ how he or his little sister came into the world. To search and find, that is to say: ask and listen, is the simplest, most spontaneous thing in the world, which isn't anyone's privilege. It is a gift which we have all received from the cradle &mdash; made for expressing oneself and to flourish in an infinity of ways, from one moment to the other and from one person to the other...

When you dare to voice such matters, [...]

Before an equally unanimous agreement, I would grudgingly insist. Really hopeless, I have even lost an occasion to keep my mouth shut...

No, it is surely not a chance if, with perfect ensemble, books of instruction and edification and manuals of all kinds present "the Knowledge" as if it had emerged fully dressed from head to toe out of genius brains which recorded them for our benefit. One can no longer [?] say that this is in bad faith, even in the rare case where the author is enough "in on it" to know that this image (which [...]) doesn't correspond at all to reality. In such a case, it happens that the presentation shows more than a collection of results and recipes, than a breeze runs through it, that a living vision animates it, which is then perhaps communicated from the author to the attentive reader. But a tacit consensus, of a considerable force it seems, holds that the text must not leave the slightest trace of the _work_ of which it is the product, even when it expresses with a terse force the perhaps deep vision of things which is one of the real fruits of the work.

Truth be told, at certain moments I have myself confusedly felt the weight of this force, of the silent consensus, at the occasion of my product of writing and publishing these "Mathematical Reflections". If I try to probe the tacit form which this consensus takes, or rather that which the resistance in me takes in my project, triggered by the consensus, the term "indecency" immediately comes to me. The consensus, internalized in me since I don't know when, tells me (and this is the first time that I take the trouble to [...] in broad daylight, in my field of vision, [...]: "It is indecent to spread out in front of others, even publicly, the ups and downs, the somewhat crappy trials and errors, the "dirty laundry" in short, of a work of discovery. That would only waste the time of the reader, which is precious. What's more, it will take additional pages and pages, that will need to be composed, printed &mdash; what a mess, at the price of the scientific printed paper! It should really be vainglorious to spread out like this things which have no interest for members of staff as if even my screw-ups were remarkable things &mdash; an occasion to strut about, in short". And more secretly still: "It is indecent to publish the notes of such a reflection, such as it is _really_ pursued, just as it would be indecent to make love in a public square, or to expose, or even leave around, sheets stained with the labors of childbirth...".

The taboo takes here the form, insidious and imperious at the same time, of a sexual taboo. It is at the moment of writing this introduction that I only begin to perceive its extraordinary force, and the scope of this by itself extraordinary fact, attesting to this force: that the real process of discovery, of a disconcerting simplicity, a childish simplicity, shows through practically nowhere; that it is silently retracted, ignored, denied. This is so even in the relatively anodyne field of scientific discovery, [...]

If I wanted to follow the "thread" which presents itself here, a thread by no means tenuous but rather thick and strong &mdash; surely it would lead me much farther than the hundreds of pages of homologico-homotopic algebra that I'm sure I will finish and deliver to the printer.
