### 8. Dream and proof
But let's return to the dream, and to the prohibition which strikes it in mathematics since millennia. It is the most compulsive perhaps among all the a-prioris, often implicit and rooted in habits, decreeing that such thing "is math" and another not. It took millennia before things as childlike and omnipresent as symmetry groups of certain geometric figures, the topological forms of certain others, the number zero, the sets finding admission in the sanctuary! When I speak of students of the topology of a sphere, and of forms which are derived from the sphere by adding handles &mdash; things that don't surprise a young child, but that [...] &mdash; the first spontaneous echo that I receive is: but this is not math! Math, of course, is the Pythagorean theorem, the altitudes of a triangle and quadratic polynomials... These students are no stupider than you or me, they react like one rects all the time when [...], except for people like Pythagoras or Riemann and maybe five or six others. Even Poincaré, who [...] triangles and squares [...]

This basic inertia of the mind, choked by its "knowledge", is certainly not specific to mathematicians. I have been moving away somewhat from my point: _the prohibition which strikes the mathematical dream_, and through it, all what doesn't present itself in the usual forms of a finished product, ready for consumption. The little that I have learned in other natural sciences suffices for me to gauge no prohibition of a similar rigor [...] condemned to sterility, or to a progress of a turtle, a little like in the Middle Ages when there was no question about [...] the word of the Holy Scriptures. But I am also aware that the deep source of the discovery, just like the approach of the discovery in all its essential aspects, is the same in mathematics as in any other region or thing in the Universe that our body and our soul may experience. _Banishing the dream, is to banish the source_ &mdash; to condemn it to an occult existence.

And I am also aware, through an experience which hasn't been disproven since my first and juvenile loves for mathematics, of this: in the deployment of a vast or profound vision of mathematical things, it is the deployment of a vision and of a comprehension, this progressive penetration, which constantly _predeces_ the proof, which renders it possible and gives it its meaning. When a situation, of the widest and the most humble, has been understood in its essential aspects, the proof of what has been understood (and of the rest) falls like a fully ripe fruit. While the proof torn away like a still green fruit from the tree of knowledge leaves an aftertaste of insatisfaction, a frustration of our hunger, by no means appeased. Two or three times in my life as a mathematician have I had to bring myself, for lack of anything better, to rip the fruit rather than to pick it. I am not saying that it hurt, or that I regret it. But what I have done better and what I have loved the most, I have taken it willingly and not by force. If mathematics has given me joys in profusion and continues to fascinate me in my riper years, it isn't by the proofs that had known how to rip, but by the inexhaustible mystery and perfect harmony that I sense in it, always ready to reveal itself to a hand and a loving eye.
