### (6) Mathematics yin and yang

#### a. The most "macho" art there is
(November 5) It's been a while that I have intended to speak about yin and yang in mathematics. The two aspects of yin and yang in a mathematical work, or in an approach to mathematics, appeared to me only in the course of the reflection over the last weeks on the yin and the yang. I was planning to probe a tiny bit in these notes this double aspect, which would be the most natural way of "getting back on topic" [fr: revenir à mes moutons], in these notes which are supposed to constitute a retrospective on "the past of a mathematician".

This which was clear to me from my first reflections on yin and yang (five years ago), was that "doing maths" is maybe the _most yang_, the most "masculine" among all known human activities to this day. As a matter of fact, any entirely intellectual activity, like notably the scientific research and, more generally, any activity commonly qualified as "research", is an activity with very strong predominance of yang. I was going to write: "marked by a strong imbalance of yang", and this is indeed the case when this activity comes to absorb the near-totality of the energy of a person. This yang predominance (or this imbalance) becomes visible through the calling forth of many yin-yang couples, for which it is clear that it is the term yang especially, not to say exclusively, which is "present" in intellectual work. I limit myself to mentioning a few, that all make part of the same "group" (or of the same "gateway to the world"), that I call the group of "the vague &mdash; the precise". (Note: in this last couple and those which follow, it is the yin term which comes first.)


|:-------------: |:-------------:|
| sensitivity | reason (or intellect)
| instinct | reflection |
| intuition | logic |
| inspiration | method |
| vision | coherence |
| the concrete | the abstract |
| the complex | the simple |
| the vague | the precise |
| dream | reality |
| the indefinite | the definite |
| the unspoken | the spoken |
| the shapeless | the shaped |
| the infinite | the finite |
| the unlimited | the limited |
| the whole (the totality) | the part |
| the global | the local (or the fragmented) |

I just went through my repertoire of yin-yang, and met with another good amount of couples whose superyang character makes itself felt in purely intellectual activities. I will only mention the first of those that I have already thought about here: the couple of _body&ndash;spirit_.

Seeing this, it seems to me like among the diverse types of intellectual activity, it is mathematical work which represents the "ultimate extreme-yang". This is no doubt due to its character of extreme abstraction, to the fact that it is, to a very large extent, independent of any "support" by sensory experience and rational observation of the external world, of the place where I hear we are living and where our bodies move. This extreme character of abstraction distinguishes mathematics from every other science, and mathematical work from every other intellectual work, by being a science or a work "of pure reason". As opposed to experimental sciences and sciences of observation it is also the only science whose results are established by _proofs_ in the most rigorous sense of the word, proceeding by a rigorously codified and in principle infallible _method_, called _"logic"_, for achieving _certainties_ which leave no room for doubts or reservations, or for the possibility of exceptions that would have eluded all cases up until the present. All these extreme-yang features come together in mathematical work, and in this work only.

Certainly these features played an important role in attracting my attention from an early age, me who had planned thoroughly for "the lead" and for the extreme yang!<sup>597</sup>(&ast;) Especially after the experience of the war and the concentration camp, subjected to discrimination and prejudice that seemed to defy even rudimentary reason, what really fascinated me in mathematical activity (for as little as I can remember <sup>598</sup>(&ast;) apart from the military variant<sup>[?]</sup> and war, parades, uniforms, standing to attention, [...], and the impeccably organized massacres and  mass graves... in my high school years), was this _power_ which it gave, by virtue of a simple proof, to outbalance even the most reluctant adhesion, in other words to _force_ the assent of other people, be they well-disposed or not &mdash; given only that they agree with me on the "rules of the game" of mathematics. These rules, since my first contact with mathematics in school, in 1940 at the high school of Mende (where I was able to go, despite being interned in the camp of Rieucros five or six kilometers away<sup>[?]</sup>), would have seemed like I knew them, sensed them by instinct, as if I had always known them<sup>599</sup>(&ast;). Surely, I sensed them better than my professor himself, who recited to us without conviction the commonplace usage then on the difference between a "postulate" (in this case, that of Euclid, the only one that we had the good fortune of hearing about...) and an "axiom", or "_the_ proof" of three "cases of equality of triangles", following the class book like a student at his first communion with his prayer book.

Five years later, seduced by the sudden prestige of atomic physics, it is however for studies of physics that I registered at the University of Montpellier, with the idea of initiating myself with the mysteries of the structure of matter and of the nature of energy. But I quickly understood that if I wanted to initiate myself with mysteries, this was not by following the course at the college where I had arrived, but by working by my own means, alone, with or without books. As I didn't have the flair, nor the equipment, to learn physics in this way; I returned to the most conductive thing at the time, I started doing mathematics, while following "from afar" a few classes, none of which was able to satisfy me, nor to bring me anything beyond what I could find in the current textbooks. But it still had to be done to pass my exams...

----

<sup>599</sup>(&ast;) Those first contacts are placed in time a little after my my reflections on the quadrature of the circle as a child, which note n&deg; 69 concerns itself with.

#### b. The beautiful stranger
(November 6) Looking back just now at the notes of yesterday, I was able to assure myself that I had paid attention not to relapse into a certain confusion between mathematical _work_, an activity with very strong and dominant yang, and "mathematics" [fr: **la** mathématique]. It is certainly not a coincidence if in French like in German, the word which designates it is of feminine gender, just like _"science"_ [fr: **la** science], which is more general, or the still wider term _"knowledge"_ [fr: **la** connaissance]<sup>600</sup>(&ast;), or also _"substance"_ [fr: **la** substance]. By the mathematician in the proper sense of the word, I mean one who "makes mathematics" (like he "makes love"). There is in fact no ambiguity to the distribution of roles in his relation to mathematics, to the unknown substance thus that he meets, that he knows and penetrates. Mathematics is therefore also as "feminine" as any woman that he has known or just desired &mdash; of whom he has sensed the powerful mystery, attracting him to her, with this force at once very soft, and irrefutable.

I realized for the first time the profound identity between the impulse which drew me toward "the woman", and that which drew me toward "the mathematics", a few months before the encountering the verses of the Tao Te Ching which would set me off for l'Eloge de l'Inceste (and along the way, for my first systematic reflection on the "feminine" and "the masculine", of which I still had no idea their Chinese names "yin" and "yang"). It was six years ago, while writing a text of two pages, titled "Sketch of a programme", implied: for the course [...] of "Initiation of Research", of which this text constituted an introduction, or more precisely a declaration of intentions on the subject of the spirit and of the "course". After having written this text, coming to my pen in all spontaneity, I was struck by the abundance of Images emerging one after the other, charged with erotic connotations. I realized that this wasn't [...] by coincidence, nor the result of a simple deliberate literary connection &mdash; that it was an unequivocal sign of deep kinship between the two passions which had dominated my adult life. Without contemplation then to deepen the thing into a systematic reflection (occurring only a few months later, on the occasion of writing the Eloge), nor even (I think) to formulate clearly to myself what was suddenly perceived, I think I can say that in this moment I learned, with little fanfare, something Important &mdash; I had "discovered" something<sup>601</sup>(&ast;), a thing which had escaped me entirely until then.

Of course, like everyone else, I had heard about Freud and of sublimation of the libido and so on, but this has nothing to do with it. Even the tons of books of psychoanalysis and all what one will [...]

<sup>602</sup>(&ast;) On the other hand, "knowledge" is masculine, and it is indeed "the husband" in the yin-yang couple of "acquaintance<sup>[understanding?]</sup> &mdash; knowledge". German is less clear here, since the two terms "Kennen" and "Wissen" are both _neuter_ (as nominalized verbs). <sup>603</sup>(&ast;&ast;) It was then a "discovery" about the mode "yin", "feminine" &mdash; that by welcoming in us a new acquaintance, in dispositions of silent opening to that which comes to us. Such moments have been rare in my life, I think. In any case, the moments of discovery of which I retain memory are almost all in the key of yang, "masculine", like [...] It is in these moments that our acquaintance with things renews. This has nothing to do with the Reading of Books, listening to presentations, that is to say: augmenting one's knowledge<sup>604</sup>(&ast;).

When I think about "the mathematics", it is certainly not about the totality of _knowledge_ that one means by "mathematics", delivered from antiquity to our days, in publications, preprints or manuscripts and correspondences. Even eliminating the repetitions, it must undoubtedly be a several millions of pages of compact text; about ten thousand books maybe, or again several thousand thick volumes, of what fills a spacious library: nothing to give you a boner, quite to the contrary! Speaking about "the mathematics" does not have the same sense as in the context of a _vision_, of a _comprehension_ &mdash; and these are essentially personal things, by no means collective. There are as many "mathematics" as there are mathematicians, each of whom has of it a certain personal experience, more or less vast or limited, of which one of the fruits is their own comprehension, their own vision of "the mathematics" (that which he has known), always more or less fragmented. It is a little like "the woman", who may seem to some like a simple abstraction, or like a hollow formula which however has a deep, powerful, (more or less) irrefutable "Reality", which each woman [...]

<sup>605</sup>(&ast;) This constatation is not contradicted by the fact that it is very possible, and even probable, that this "awareness" [fr: prise de conscience] (the passage thus to a conscious level of a thing perceived in the unconscious) has been facilitated by the existence of the Freudian consensus, of which I have heard without really feeling hot or cold. Knowledge may encourage the hatching of an acquaintance, but it is much more common, it seems to me, that it chokes inside the egg [...] &mdash; in the manner of pre-made "responses" that suffocate inside the Egg the hatching of a (good) question...

It is a remarkable thing, while "everyone in the world has heard about" a little bit about the role of the erotic drive in creativity (artistic or scientific, say), that it didn't shine through in the consensus which was current in the milieu of which I was a part at one moment or another. However, there was no lack of striking facts, that could have been given to me for a long time from A flea in my ear<sup>[?]</sup>. Thus, up until three years ago, the periods of intense creativity in my life, and especially The periods of inner renewal, were equally characterized by a powerful influx of erotic energy. Nevertheless, my mathematical activity was never accompanied by conscious erotic images or associations. But I recall having been a little disconcerted, in the 1950s, during a session of work of the Bourbaki group, by a colleague and friend who evoked from me, like the most common thing in the world, a particularity in his mathematical work: when he had arrived after a difficult work, it seemed like an imperious desire to make love (with or without partner) &mdash; and this even more strongly [...]


[...]

#### c. Desire and rigour
(<sup>121</sup>) (November 7) At the level of our intellectual faculties, of reason, "knowing [being acquainted with]" with a thing, is a completely different thing, the "_understanding_". And in a work of discovery located in this register of our faculties, the momentum of acquaintance which animates the infant in us (Independently of personal motivations to the "self", to the "Boss" [fr: Patron]) is the _desire to understand_. This is perhaps the principal difference which distinuishes the drive toward intellectual knowledge [fr: connaissance intellectuelle] from its older sister, the drive toward love [fr: pulsion amoureuse]. This desire to understand predates any "method", scientific or otherwise. It is a tool, shaped by the desire to serve its ends: to penetrate the unknown accessible to reason, for the purpose of understanding. The knowledge [fr: connaissance] is born from the desire to know [fr: connaitre], thus from the desire to understand when it is reason which wants to know. The _method_, instrument of the desire, is by itself the expert hands of a midwife, giving birth to it. But sometimes [...]

[...]

#### d. The rising sea...

#### e. The nine months and the five minutes

#### f. The Funeral of Yin (yang burying yin (4))

#### g. Supermom or Superdad?

---

---

---

---

---

---

---

---

---

---

---

---
